51. After his descent from the mountain Moses, employ ing workmen, constructed these things according to the pattern shown to him. 90 While he was in that sanctuary not made with hands, 91 he was commanded how the priest should be adorned when he entered the sanctuary. 92 The law prescribed the details of the under and outer garments.
52. The first in order of the garments was not the hidden but the visible. There was an ephod embroidered of different colors with gold thread predominating. (The veil was also made of these colors.) 93 Clasps held the ephod together on both sides and provided a setting of gold for emeralds. 94 The beauty of these stones was due partly to their natural radiance—from them a green brightness was given forth—and partly to the marvellous skill of the engraving. (This was not the skill which carves out images of idols, but the adornment was the names of the patriarchs engraved six on each stone.)
53. From the clasps down the front the little shield-like ornaments hung loosely. 95 There were also intertwined cords plaited through one another in a netlike pattern hanging from the clasps on each side. They dropped down below the shield‐ like ornaments so that the beauty of the plaiting might, I think, be more conspicuous being enhanced by the background.
54. The ornament 96 made out of gold which hung down from the chest had on it stones of different kinds equal in number to the patriarchs. 97 These were arranged in four rows set three to a row, with the names of the tribes written on them. The tunic beneath the ephod extended from the neck to the toes and was suitably adorned with fringes. The hem was decked out beautifully, not only by the variety of skilled weaving but also by the hanging of gold ornaments. These were golden bells and pomegranates distributed alternately along the hem.
55. The fillet for the head was solid violet, and the metal‐ leaf frontpiece was of pure gold engraved with the ineffable letters. 98 There was also a girdle which held together the loose folds of the garment, as well as an adornment for the hidden parts of the body, and the other articles of clothing which symbolically instruct concerning priestly virtue under the form of clothing.
56. After he was instructed in these and other such things by the ineffable teaching of God while he was surrounded by that invisible darkness, and having surpassed himself by the aid of the mystical doctrines, he emerged again out of the darkness. He then went down to his people to share with them the marvels which had been shown to him in the theophany, to deliver the laws, and to institute for them the sanctuary and priesthood according to the pattern shown to him on the mountain.
57. He carried in his hands the holy tablets, which were a divine invention and gift that needed no human cooperation to be brought into existence. 99 Both the material and the writing on them were equally the work of God. The writing was the Law. But the people prevented grace: Before giving heed to the lawgiver they rebelled in idolatry. 100
58. Some considerable time had elapsed while Moses devoted himself to conversation with God in that divine initiation. He participated in that eternal life under the darkness for forty days and nights, and lived in a state beyond nature, 101 for his body had no need of food during that time. It was then that the people, like a little child who escapes the attention of his pedagogue, were carried along into disorderliness by uncontrolled impulses, and, banding together against Aaron, forced the priest to lead them in idolatry.
59. When the idol had been made out of gold (it was a calf), they exulted in their impiety; but Moses came to them and broke the tablets which he had received from God so that they might suffer a punishment worthy of their transgression by having no share in the God-given grace.
60. He then purified his people's guilt with their own blood when the Levites slew them, 102 and appeased the divine by his own anger against the transgressors. Thereupon he utterly destroyed the idol. Once more applying himself to the matter for forty days, he received the tablets. The writing on them was done by divine power, but the material was fashioned by the hand of Moses. 103 He received them while for the same number of days he again lived beyond nature in a manner different from that to which we are accustomed and admitted to his body none of those sustenances which our nature requires.
61. Moses accordingly erected for them the tabernacle, delivered to them the laws, and established the priesthood in keeping with the teaching given to him by God. The workmanship on all the material objects was done according to the divine directions—the tabernacle, the entrances, and everything inside—the altar of incense, the altar of holocaust, the candlestick, the curtains, the propitiatory within the holy of holies; the adornment of the priesthood, the myrrh, the different sacrifices—the purifications, the thankofferings, the offerings to avert evil, the propitiations for trespasses. 104 As he arranged everything in the required manner, among his family he aroused against himself envy, that congenital malady in the nature of man.
62. Even Aaron, who was endowed with the honors of the priesthood, and his sister Miriam, driven by a most female‐ like jealousy against the honor given to Moses by God, so railed against him that deity was provoked to punish their trespass. 105 Here Moses showed patience most worthy of admiration, because, when God punished the irrational envy of the woman, he made his nature prevail over anger and appeased God on behalf of his sister.
63. The multitude again fell into disorderliness. 106 What led to their transgression was a lack of moderation in regard to the pleasures of the table, for they were not satisfied to live healthfully and painlessly on the food which flowed down from above, but the craving for meat made them prefer slavery in Egypt to their present good circumstances. Moses took counsel with God concerning the passion which had overcome them, and God instructed that they should not have such desires because he would give what they longed for. He sent flocks of birds like a cloud to fly close to the ground near the camp. The ease with which they could catch the birds led them in their craving for meat to stuff themselves.
64. Their immoderation at once became destructive to their bodies, and their satiety ended in sickness and death. This example became to them and to those watching them a sufficient cause for moderation.
65. Next, Moses sent spies into that region which they hoped to inhabit according to the divine promise. 107 When not all of them reported the truth, but some gave false and discouraging information, the people again rose in anger against Moses. God decreed that those who had no confidence in divine help should not see the promised land.
66. As they were crossing the desert, water again failed them—as did their memory of the divine power, 108 for the earlier miracle 109 of the rock did not give them confidence that their present necessities would be provided for. Abandoning their hopes for better things, they reviled Moses and God himself, so that the disbelief of the people seemed to intimidate even Moses. Nevertheless he performed for them again the miracle of changing that jutting rock 110 into water.
67. Again the pleasures of the table enslaved them, and their desires led them to gluttony. Although they lacked none of the necessities of life, disorderly youths were dreaming of the Egyptian plenty. They were disciplined by very severe scourges: Serpents within the encampment as they bit them injected deadly poison in them. 111
68. When deaths caused by the serpents followed in rapid succession, the lawgiver, at the urging of divine counsel, cast a bronze likeness of a serpent and placed it on a height to be seen by the whole camp. In this way he stayed the harm done among the people by the serpents and delivered them from destruction. For he who looked on the bronze image of the serpent did not fear the bite of the real serpent, since looking at it counteracted the poison by some mysterious antidote.
69. Some of the people again rose up against Moses' leadership and put pressure on him to transfer the priesthood to themselves. 112 Although he made supplication to God on behalf of the rebels, the righteous judgment of God was stronger than the compassion of Moses for his people. For the earth, opening up like a chasm at the divine will and closing up again, swallowed all those who set themselves, together with all their kinsmen, against the authority of Moses. When two hundred and fifty of those who raved about the priesthood were consumed by fire, the people were brought to their senses.
70. In order to persuade men that the grace of the priesthood comes from God to those who are worthy, Moses received rods from the most eminent man in each tribe, each man bringing a rod marked with his own name. 113 Aaron's rod was among them. Moses placed the rods before the sanctuary, and by them he made God's choice concerning the priesthood clear to the people. Aaron's rod alone budded and produced ripe fruit from the wood—and the fruit was the almond.
71. It seemed a very great marvel to the unbelievers that what was dried, polished, and rootless all at once produced the growth natural to things which are planted. Instead of earth, bark, moisture, roots, and time, it was the divine power at work in the wood.
72. Thereupon, when he led the army through foreign nations who blocked their passage, he swore an oath that the people would not pass through the fields and vineyards but would keep to the royal road, turning aside neither to the right nor to the left. 114 When the adversaries would not make peace on these terms, he prevailed in battle against the enemy and became master of the route.
73. Next, a certain Balak who ruled a greater nation known as the Midianites, panic-stricken at the experience of those who were destroyed and expecting to undergo nothing less calamitous at the hands of the Israelites, brought in support not arms and men but magical arts in the person of a certain Balaam. 115 He was commonly reputed to be skilled in these things and was believed by those who employed him to be powerful in such matters. His augury came from watching the flight of birds, 116 yet he was a hard man to deal with, for with the cooperation of demons 117 he could bring utter ruin on men through this magical power.
74. As he followed those who were leading him to the king of that nation, he learned by the voice of his ass that the way was not propitious for him. Having learned in a vision what was to be done, he found that any harm to be inflicted by working magic was impotent against those who have God as their ally. Moved by divine inspiration instead of by demonic power, he uttered such words as were a clear prophecy of better things which would later come to pass. What prevented his making use of his skill for evil also brought him an awareness of divine power. Leaving divination aside, he acted as an interpreter of the divine will. 118
75. Then the foreign nation was destroyed. The Israelites had the upper hand in the battle, but they in turn were overcome by licentious passion for their female captives. 119 When Phineas then with one blow ran those through who were entangled in dishonor, the wrath of God against those raving for unlawful unions abated. Then the lawgiver, ascending a high mountain, surveyed from afar the land which was prepared for Israel by the divine promise made to the fathers. 120 He departed from this human life, leaving behind no sign on the earth nor any grave as a memorial of his departure. 121