16. Moses is said to have been born when the tyrant's law sought to prevent the birth of male offspring. 28 Yet in his outward grace he anticipated the whole contribution which he would make in time. Already appearing beautiful 29 in swaddling clothes, he caused his parents to draw back from having such a child destroyed by death.
17. Thus, when the threat of the tyrant prevailed, he was not simply thrown into the Nile but was placed in a basket daubed along its joints with slime and pitch, 30 and so was given to the current. (This was recounted by those who carefully gave a narrative concerning him.) 31 Guided by some divine power, the basket moved to a certain place along the sloping bank where it was washed up naturally by the lapping of the waves. As the king's daughter happened to come to that grassy bank where the basket washed up, she discovered him when he gave a childlike cry in the ark. When she saw the outward grace evident in him, the princess out of her good will immediately adopted him and took him as her son. But when he instinctively refused a stranger's nourishment, he was nursed at his mother's breast 32 through the contrivance of his close relatives.
18. After he had left childhood, and had been educated in pagan learning 33 during his royal upbringing, 34 he did not choose the things considered glorious by the pagans nor did he any longer recognize as his mother that wise woman by whom he had been adopted, but he returned to his natural mother and attached himself to his own kinsmen. 35 During a fight between a Hebrew and an Egyptian he sided with his countryman and killed the foreigner. 36 Then when two Hebrews fought with each other, he tried to restrain them, counseling them that because they were brothers they should make nature and not passion the arbiter of their disputes.
19. Having been rebuffed by the one in the wrong, he made this rejection the occasion for a greater philosophy. 37 Separating himself from association with the people, he thereafter lived alone. He became the son-in-law of one of the foreigners, a man with insight into what is noble, and perceptive in judging the habits and lives of men. This man saw in one act—the attack on the shepherds 38 —the virtue of the young man, how he fought on behalf of the right without looking for personal gain. Considering the right valuable in itself, Moses punished the wrong done by the shepherds, although they had done nothing against him. Honoring the young man Moses for these acts and judging his virtue in his manifest poverty more valuable than great riches, the man gave him his daughter in marriage and, in keeping with his authority, he permitted Moses to live as he wished. Moses lived alone in the mountains away from all the turmoil of the marketplace; there in the wilderness he cared for his sheep.
20. After he had passed some time in this kind of life, the history says an awe-inspiring theophany occurred. 39 At high noon a light brighter than the sunlight dazzled his eyes. 40 Astonished at the strange sight, he looked up at the mountain and saw a bush from which this light was flaming up like a fire. When he saw the branches of the bush sprouting up in flame as if they were in pure water, 41 he said to himself, "I will go and see this great sight." As soon as he said this, he no longer received the marvel of the light with his sight alone, but (which is most astounding of all) his hearing too was illuminated by the rays of light. The light's grace was distributed to both senses, illuminating the sight with flashing rays and lighting the way for the hearing with undefiled teachings. The voice from the light forbade Moses to approach the mountain burdened with lifeless sandals. 42 He removed the sandals from his feet, and so stood on that ground on which the divine light was shining.
21. I think that the discussion should not dwell extensively on the bare history of the man. We should give attention to the matters we have proposed. After he was empowered by the theophany which he had seen, he was commanded to release his countrymen from Egyptian bondage. In order that he might learn more fully the strength implanted in him by God he tested the divine command by the things in his hands. 43 This was the test. When the rod fell from his hand, it became alive, a living creature (in fact it was a serpent); when he took it up again in his hand, it became what it had been before becoming an animal. When he withdrew his hand from his bosom, it looked as white as snow, but when he put it back in his bosom, it returned to its natural color.
22. Moses went down to Egypt and he took with him his foreign wife and the children she had borne him. 44 Scripture says that an angel encountered him and threatened death. His wife appeased the angel by the blood of the child's circumcision. Then he met Aaron, who had himself been brought by God to this meeting.
23. Later, the people in Egypt were gathered by Moses and Aaron into a general assembly and their release from bondage was announced all around to those who were already distressed by the hardships of their labors. 45 Report of this came to the tyrant himself. When he heard it his anger at both the overseers of the work and the Israelites themselves was greater than ever. The levy of bricks to be made was increased 46 and a harsher command was sent down, not only to those slaving with the clay but also to those laboriously gathering chaff and straw.
24. Pharaoh (for this was the Egyptian tyrant's name) attempted to counter the divine signs performed by Moses and Aaron with magical tricks performed by his sorcerers. 47 When Moses again turned his own rod into an animal before the eyes of the Egyptians, they thought that the sorcery of the magicians could equally work miracles with their rods. This deceit was exposed when the serpent produced from the staff of Moses ate the sticks of sorcery—the snakes no less! The rods of the sorcerers had no means of defense nor any power of life, only the appearance which cleverly devised sorcery showed to the eyes of those easily deceived.
25. When Moses saw that all the subjects agreed with their leader in his evil, he laid a blow upon the whole Egyptian nation, sparing no one from the calamities. 48 Like an army under orders, the very elements of the universe—earth, water, air, and fire which are seen to be in everything—cooperated with him in this attack on the Egyptians, and changed their natural operations to serve human purposes. 49 For by the same power and at the same time and place the disorderly were punished and those free of wrong did not suffer.
26. At the command of Moses all the water in Egypt turned into blood. 50 The fish were destroyed because the water thickened, but to the Hebrews alone the blood was water when they drew it. Found among the Hebrews this water provided an occasion for the magicians to use their art in making the water appear bloody.
27. Similarly frogs covered Egypt in large numbers. 51 Their breeding in these numbers was not natural, but Moses' command changed the normal density of frogs. All the land was in a sorry state, for the Egyptians' houses were being overrun with these creatures, while the Hebrews were free of this hateful plague.
28. Likewise, there was no distinction between night and day to the Egyptians, who lived in unchanging gloom. 52 To the Hebrews, however, nothing was out of the ordinary. It was the same with all the other things—the hail, the fire, the boils, the gadflies, 53 the flies, the cloud of locusts: Each had its natural effect on the Egyptians. 54 The Hebrews learned of the misfortune of their neighbors by report, since they experienced no similar attack themselves. Then the death of the firstborn made the distinction between Egyptians and Hebrews still sharper. 55 The Egyptians were dismayed, lamenting the loss of their dearest children, while the Hebrews continued to live in total serenity and safety. Salvation was assured to them by the shedding of the blood. 56 At every entrance both the doorposts and the lintel joining them were marked with blood.
29. While the Egyptians were downcast at the fate of their firstborn and each individual was lamenting his sufferings and those of everyone else, Moses led the exodus of the Israelites. 57 He had previously prepared them to take away with themselves the wealth of the Egyptians on the pretext that it was a loan. 58 The history goes on to say that when they were three days out of Egypt, the Egyptian was angry that Israel did not remain in slavery, and after mobilizing all his subjects for war, he pursued the people with his cavalry. 59 When they saw the deployment of the cavalry and infantry, they were panic-stricken since they were inexperienced in war and untrained in such sights, and they rose up against Moses. Then the history tells the most marvellous thing about Moses. He did two distinctly separate things at once: By spoken word he encouraged the Israelites and exhorted them not to abandon high hopes, but inwardly, in his thoughts, he pleaded with God on behalf of those who cowered in fear and he was directed by counsel from above how to escape the danger. God himself, the history says, gave ear to his voiceless cry. 60
