Lord Jesus, I thank you that you are our Lord and that you have given us all authority over all the power of the enemy according to Luke 10:19, and that nothing will harm us when we use this authority. I address all demonic activity and I cancel all assignments and bind and gag every demon in the vicinity now in Jesus’ name. Father, I ask that you send every angel necessary to help us tonight to facilitate freedom, in the name of the Lord Jesus. And Holy Spirit, we ask you to cover us, grant us wisdom and understanding to pray according to the will of the Father.
Jesus, You are the Lord of my life. I surrender my life to you, and I renounce all dark, evil and demonic things I have been involved with in my life, and all works of satan. I agree with the prayers said tonight, and I ask you to forgive me and cleanse me, from all my sins. I turn away from them. I thank You for forgiving me. As You have forgiven me, I want to learn to forgive others. So Jesus,
- I repent for pride, I humble myself before You.
- I repent for works of the flesh, of sexual immorality, drunkenness, drugs, addictions, jealously, envy, anger, rage, fighting.
- I repent for receiving fear into my life.
- I repent for not giving tithe and offerings, as You have directed Lord.
- I repent for any dishonor that I have towards my parents. I forgive them and I choose now to honor them.
- I repent for my sins and the sins of my forefathers, for all generations back, including rebellion, ungodliness and disobedience. I forgive them and myself. And by the Blood of Jesus, I break the power of all generational curses and spells, inherited spirits of Satan, and spirits of infirmity. I break them off of myself and my future generations. I sever, in Jesus name, any satanic generational or self-spoken contracts, vows and dedications, pacts and oaths, ties and programs, seals and assignments. I especially cancel all assignments against me, to lie to my mind. I cancel these lies now, permanently in Jesus’ Name.
- I repent of any curses and ungodly vows, that I have spoken over myself or others. I ask You to forgive me, and I cancel them in Jesus name.
- I repent for idolatry, and I confess this as sin.
- I repent for hypnosis and all witchcraft, for myself and all ancestors. I renounce all witchcraft powers and psychic activity. I cancel all Satanic prayers or incantations, that have been prayed over me and my family; any hexes and vexes, voodoo, Indian and medicine man curses, curses upon the land where I live, or my home and possessions.
- I repent for any illegitimacy in my family line. In Jesus Name, I break the curse of illegitimacy, off of me and my family.
- I repent for any involvement with secret societies, and their associated organizations. I confess this as sin, and in Jesus’ name, I break any related curses, off my family and me.
- In Jesus’ name, I cancel all genetic and DNA defects. I command my genetics and my DNA, to line up with my inheritance in Christ Jesus.
Father, I receive my forgiveness, and thank you for forgiving me. I proclaim my freedom, by the blood of Jesus, and Your freedom for my children, in Jesus’ name. I put aside all the things that have happened, and I forgive myself. You have forgiven me Lord, therefore I forgive myself.
Father forgive me for every blaming You, for evil things. I am still learning, that it is Satan who comes, to steal kill and destroy. You Lord, came to give me abundant life, and blessings! I choose you Jesus, life and blessings!
Show me where any remaining wounds are, so that I can forgive whoever has done these things, and I can be free.
(Think on this): Let the Holy Spirit speak to you now and give you the names of all the people you need to forgive so that you can be completely free.
Forgiveness Prayer:
Jesus, I choose to forgive any people who have intentionally or unintentionally caused me pain. This includes: my Mother, my Father, my Grandparents, my brothers and sisters, or any others who have hurt me.
I forgive them for all that has happened, all that has gone on, because You say that I must forgive to be forgiven. I make a decision to forgive them. I forgive myself for the parts I have played, and I ask You, Lord, to forgive me.
As I hold out my hands, this represents all the negative and tormenting feelings and unforgiveness that I have toward any of these.
Right now I give all the hurts, bitterness, resentment, anger, offense, feelings of abandonment, betrayal, neglect, rejection, deception, manipulation, control, and all other negative feelings to You.
I Peter 5:7 tells me to Cast all my cares on You, because You care for me.
So here they are Lord, I give them to You.
Now, in Jesus’ name, I also destroy and break, cancel and vacate all judgments I have made and stated against my Mother, my Father, my Grandparents, my brothers and sisters, or any others, or myself. These judgments are now broken, null and void and we are free. Father, please forgive me for pronouncing judgment on them. I leave judgment to You. I command all evil spirits that have come through these judgments to depart. Demons of these judgments, in the name of Jesus, GO!
In Jesus’ name, I also break the power of all curses my Mother, my Father, my Grandparents, my brothers and sisters, or any others have spoken over me. I cancel all curses I have spoken over them or myself. I cancel all ungodly vows that I have made. Please forgive me, my father, my mother, and all my parents’ ancestors for all ungodliness. I now cancel, remove and uproot all iniquity from all my ancestors down through me and my seed, spirit, soul and body. In Your Name Lord Jesus, I ask you to remove the very substance of iniquity from all parts of my body, soul and spirit by Your Blood, once and for all. And I place the Blood and the Cross of Jesus Christ between me and all generational curses. No ancestral curses or assignments can come through the Cross and the Blood in Jesus Name.
I also terminate, in Jesus’ name, all ungodly soul ties that exist between my Mother, my Father, my Grandparents, my brothers and sisters, or any others, and me. I do this spiritually, physically, mentally, emotionally, financially, and sexually, and I command all evil spirits that have come through these soul ties to depart. Control spirits coming through any other people and all associated demon spirits to now go from me. Demons of these curses, in the name of Jesus, GO!
Lord Jesus, I now receive from your hand all the blessings you have for me in exchange for all the curses that have been removed! Thank you Jesus that You are now healing every wound that has come through this relationship.
I rebuke and I renounce, the ANTICHRIST spirit and every form of it, including: Rebellion, Stubbornness
I rebuke and I renounce, the ANGER spirit and every form of it, including: Rage, Wrath, Temper, Violence
I rebuke and I renounce, the BITTERNESS spirit and every form of it, including: Hate, Self-Hate, Offense, Hurt, Resentment, Revenge, Retaliation, Jealousy, Unforgiveness
I rebuke and I renounce, the BONDAGE spirit and every form of it, including: Impatience, Perfectionism, Workaholic
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the TRAUMA spirit and every form of it, including: Birth Trauma, Sexual abuse, Physical abuse, Emotional abuse, Racism, Insomnia, Disorder, Hoarding, Bulimia, Anorexia
I rebuke and I renounce, the CONDEMNATION spirit and every form of it, including: Guilt, Feeling Accused, Inferiority, Insecurity, Shame, Intimidation
I rebuke and I renounce, the CONFUSION spirit and every form of it, including: Forgetfulness, Double Mindedness, Easily Distracted, Procrastination
I rebuke and I renounce, the CONTROL spirit and every form of it, including: Manipulation, Possessiveness, Domineering
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the CRAVINGS and ADDICTIONS spirit and every form of it, including: Alcohol, Nicotine, Drugs, Medications, Gluttony, Sweets, Caffeine, Affection, Sex, Pornography, Gambling
I rebuke and I renounce, the DEATH spirit and every form of it, including: Suicide, Murder, Abortion
I rebuke and I renounce, the DECEPTION and ACCEPTING LIES spirit and every form of it, including: Deceit, Denial
I rebuke and I renounce, the DESTROYER spirit and every form of it, including: Divorce, Failure, Seizures, Convulsions, Spiritual Deafness
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the FATIGUE spirit and every form of it, including: Tiredness, Sleepiness
I rebuke and I renounce, the FALSE COMPASSION and RESPONSIBILITY spirit and every form of it, including: Co-Dependency, Need to Rescue, False Burden of Others
I rebuke and I renounce, the FEAR spirit and every form of it, including: of Abandonment, of Future, of Poverty, of Spiders, Snakes, Animals, of People, of Disapproval, of Confrontation, of Germs, of Sickness, of Authority, of the Dark, of Commitment, of Failure, of Trusting, Phobias, of Satan
I rebuke and I renounce, the HEAVINESS and STRESS spirit and every form of it, including: Depression, Sadness, Hopelessness, Worry, Anxiety, Stress, Pressure, Tension
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the LYING spirit and every form of it, including: Exaggeration, Lying to Self
I rebuke and I renounce, the IDOLATRY spirit and every form of it, including: Of Self, Of People, Pets, Of Things, Money, Of Hobbies, Games, Sports, Of Business/work/computers, Of Facebook, Twitter, Of Cell phone, texting, Of Entertainment, TV, Of the Past
I rebuke and I renounce, the INFIRMITY and PHYSICAL PAIN spirit and every form of it.
I rebuke and I renounce, the JEZEBEL spirit and every form of it, including: Control Spirit, Manipulation, Seductive Behavior
I rebuke and I renounce, the PRIDE spirit and every form of it, including: Mind Blocking, Arrogance, Disobedience, Intellectualism, Independent Attitude, Offense, Vanity, Self-Righteousness, Ego, Spiritual Pride
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the MENTAL ILLNESS spirit and every form of it, including: Schizophrenia, Paranoia, Hallucinations, Manic Depression, Bi-polar
I rebuke and I renounce, the MOCKERY and CRITICISM spirit and every form of it.
I rebuke and I renounce, the PERVERSION spirit and every form of it, including: Lust, Fornication, Homosexuality, Masturbation, Adultery, Incest, Harlotry, Rape of another, Exposure, Fantasy, Abuse of Others
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the POVERTY spirit and every form of it, including: Financial Bondage, Lack, Laziness, Get Rich Quick Schemes, Government Dependency
I rebuke and I renounce, the PROFANITY spirit and every form of it, including: Cursing, Blasphemy, Taking God’s Name in vain
I rebuke and I renounce, the REJECTION spirit and every form of it, including: Fear of Rejection, Self-Rejection, Rejection in the Womb
I rebuke and I renounce, the REBELLION spirit and every form of it, including: Self-Will, Stubbornness, Disobedience, Anti-Submissiveness
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the FALSE RELIGION spirit and every form of it, including: Legalism, Eastern Religions, Yoga, Secret Societies, KKK, Free Masonry, Eastern Star
I rebuke and I renounce, the SPIRIT OF “SELF” and every form of it, including: Selfishness, Self gratification
I rebuke and I renounce, the STEALING and CHEATING spirit and every form of it.
I rebuke and I renounce, the STRIFE spirit and every form of it, including: Argument, Quarreling, Fighting, Gossiping, Faultfinding, Meanness, Cruelness
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!
I rebuke and I renounce, the TORMENT spirit and every form of it, including: Harassing Thoughts, Nightmares
I rebuke and I renounce, the WITCHCRAFT and OCCULT spirit and every form of it, including: Ouija, Charms, Crystals, Familiar Spirits, Spirit Guides, Fortunetelling, Divination, Sorcery, Spells, Horoscopes, Astrology, Worship of the Dead, Tarot cards, Voodoo, Wicca, Santeria, Medicine Man Spirits, Shamanism, Psychic Powers, Séance, Astral Projection, Harry Potter, Twilight
I rebuke and I renounce, the ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT spirit and every form of it, including: Immaturity, Hating discipline, Control by Manipulation, Need for Attention, Victim Mentality, Irresponsibility, Childish Self Will, Hate for own body, Locked into Childhood, Delusions of grandeur, Escape thru drugs and alcohol, Foolish Behavior, Self-pitying, Dramatizing
I command all these spirits, to go NOW, in the name of Jesus! Father please forgive me, for allowing these spirits, access to my life! Thank you Father for forgiving me!